Primary care

Improving management of obesity in primary care:
cluster randomised trial
Helen Moore, Carolyn D Summerbell, Darren C Greenwood, Philip Tovey, Jacqui Griffiths,
Maureen Henderson, Kate Hesketh, Sally Woolgar, Ashley J Adamson

Abstract
Objective To evaluate a training programme intended
to improve the management of obesity, delivered to
general practice teams.
Design Cluster randomised trial.
Setting Northern and Yorkshire region of England
Participants 44 general practices invited
consecutively attending obese adults to participate;
843 patients attended for collection of baseline data
and were subsequently randomised.
Intervention 4.5 hour training programme
promoting an obesity management model.
Main outcome measures Difference in weight
between patients in intervention and control groups
at 12 months (main outcome measure) and at 3
months and 18 months; change in practitioners’
knowledge and behaviour in obesity management
consultations.
Results Twelve months after training the patients in
the intervention group were 1 (95% confidence
interval − 1.9 to 3.9) kg heavier than controls (P = 0.5).
Some evidence indicated that practitioners’
knowledge had improved. Some aspects of the
management model, including recording weight,
target weight, and dietary targets, occurred more
frequently in intervention practices after the training,
but in absolute terms levels of implementation were
low.
Conclusion A training package promoting a brief,
prescriptive approach to the treatment of obesity
through lifestyle modification, intended to be
incorporated into routine clinical practice, did not
ultimately affect the weight of this motivated and at
risk cohort of patients.

Introduction
Obesity is now a major public health problem across
the world. Easy solutions are unlikely, given the
complex interaction between the abundant availability
of energy dense food, the ever decreasing demand for
energy expenditure in the modern world, and the
impact of our genetic make up. Treatment of people
who are already obese is difficult; however, several systematic reviews in recent years have shown that diet,
exercise, and behavioural approaches, used in combiBMJ VOLUME 327

8 NOVEMBER 2003

bmj.com

nation, are effective management strategies, at least in
the short term.1 2
The role of primary care in managing obesity in
the United Kingdom is linked to achieving targets for
the national service framework for coronary heart disease.3 The Department of Health stated that primary
care should “use every opportunity to promote healthy
lifestyles” and should provide advice on diet, weight
reduction, and exercise.4 A survey of general practitioners and practice nurses by the National Audit
Office identified several factors that they felt would
assist them in the treatment of patients, including more
information on effective interventions, availability of
better materials for advising patients, and better training for staff.5 Little is known about how effective such
training is in helping primary care teams to manage
obesity more effectively. A systematic review of
interventions to improve health professionals’ management of obesity in 1999 found little rigorous
research from which to draw conclusions.6
We have evaluated, in a cluster randomised trial, a
training programme (the intervention) promoting the
evidence based treatment of obesity, delivered to
general practice teams (unit of randomisation).
Although many trials have measured the effectiveness
of training, few have measured effectiveness at the level
of health outcomes in patients. The primary outcome
measure in this study was difference in patients’ weight,
but we also measured difference in practitioners’
knowledge and behaviour in weight management
consultations.

Methods
The method has been reported in detail elsewhere.7
Figures 1 and 2 show the flow of practices, staff, and
patients through the trial.
Recruitment
We recruited practices from four health authority areas
in the Northern and Yorkshire region of England
during a four month period. We invited all 161
practices in selected primary care groups to participate, of which we randomised 44 (without financial
incentives): 12 in North Durham, 16 in Leeds, 10 in
Newcastle, and 6 in Scarborough. All general
practitioners and practice nurses in the 44 practices (a
total of 245 staff) were eligible to participate. In a pre-

Centre for Research
in Primary Care,
University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9PL
Helen Moore
director of Yorkshire
Primary Care
Research Network
School of Health,
University of
Teesside,
Middlesbrough
TS1 3BA
Carolyn D
Summerbell
reader in human
nutrition
Biostatistics Unit,
University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9LN
Darren C
Greenwood
lecturer in medical
statistics
School of
Healthcare Studies,
University of Leeds,
Leeds LS2 9JT
Philip Tovey
principal research
fellow
Department of
Nutrition and
Dietetics, Leeds
Community
Nutrition, St Mary’s
Hospital, Leeds
LS12 3QE
Jacqui Griffiths
senior community
dietitian
Department of
Nutrition and
Dietetics, University
Hospital of North
Durham, Durham
DH1 5TW
Maureen
Henderson
senior community
dietitian
continued over
bmj.com 2003;327:1085

page 1 of 5

Primary care
Newcastle
Nutrition, Newcastle
Hospitals NHS
Trust, Royal
Victoria Infirmary,
Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 4LP
Kate Hesketh
senior community
dietitian
Department of
Nutrition and
Dietetics,
Scarborough,
Whitby and Ryedale
Primary Care Trust,
Scarborough
Hospital,
Scarborough
YO12 6QL
Sally Woolgar
diabetes specialist
dietitian
Human Nutrition
Research Centre,
School of Clinical
Medical Sciences,
University of
Newcastle upon
Tyne, Newcastle
NE1 7RU
Ashley J Adamson
lecturer in human
nutrition
Correspondence to:
Helen Moore
h.moore@leeds.ac.uk

Practices invited to participate (n=161)
Refused or not able
to participate (n=115)
Practices agreed to participate (n=46, 28%)
Withdrew due to pressures
in practice (n=2, 4%)

Randomised: practices (n=44), staff (n=245),
staff completing baseline assessment (n=231)

Intervention
Practices (n=22), staff (n=115)

Control
Practices (n=22), staff (n=116)

Practices not receiving planned
intervention (n=2, 9%)
Declined training (n=1)
Sessions combined (n=1)
Practices completing the trial
(n=22). Staff completing follow
up assessment (n=95, 83%)

Practices completing the trial
(n=22). Staff completing follow
up assessment (n=97, 84%)

Fig 1 Flow of practices and practice staff through the trial

vious trial,8 staff working in primary care but between
practices (for example, district nurses and health
visitors) were a source of contamination, so we asked
for these staff to be excluded from the study.
The study protocol required practice staff to invite
consecutively attending obese adults (body mass index
≥ 30 kg/m2) aged 16 to 64 years to participate in the
trial over a defined six month recruitment period.
Patients were asked to return a consent form to the
practice by stamped addressed envelope or on their
next visit. The recruitment strategy was extended to
include assistance from study personnel and mail
shots. Towards the end of the recruitment period, a
researcher accessed the list of patients who had been
recruited in the early stages and invited them to attend
for collection of baseline data, so that all patients had
been weighed within two months of randomisation. All
practices were randomised simultaneously in June
2000.
Randomisation
Raab and Butcher did the randomisation, using the
method they described in 2001, in which patient level
characteristics (body mass index at recruitment, age,
and sex) and practice level characteristics (practice size,
socioeconomic status, and existence of dietetic service)
were used to inform randomisation.9 One permutation
of treatment allocation with acceptable balance was
randomly selected, a method that ensured equal numbers of practices and approximately equal numbers of
patients in both treatment arms. Researchers collecting
baseline data contacted a distant member of the
project team to ascertain intervention status. We
arranged delivery of the intervention to practices as
soon as possible after completion of baseline data.
Each intervention practice was allocated a control
practice pair—for purposes of data collection only—to
reduce any impact of seasonal variation in the main
outcome variable.10

page 2 of 5

Intervention
At the start of the intervention period, we provided all
practices with a list of their patients who had entered the
trial. The educational strategy was based on a previous
nutrition training programme.8 We delivered three 90
minute sessions, intended to be delivered at intervals of
no less than one week and no more than two weeks
apart, to the 22 intervention practices. We asked all general practitioners and practice nurses to attend all three
sessions. Four dietitians were trained in the standardised
delivery of the training and then delivered the
programme to small group, multidisciplinary general
practice teams. The programme promoted a model
approach to obesity treatment, which incorporated best
evidence and was perceived to be brief enough that primary care staff could deliver it to their patients. The
training covered information on the clinical benefit of
weight loss and effective treatment options, including
reduction of dietary energy intake, increased physical
activity, and pharmaceutical intervention.
The model of obesity management entailed practitioners seeing patients regularly (about every two
weeks) until they had lost 10% of their original body
weight and then less regularly (about every one to two
months) for maintenance of weight over a sustained
period. Current and target weight and dietary and
activity targets were to be recorded in the patients’
records to facilitate continuity of support across
practice teams. Prescription of a moderate energy deficit diet was advocated, as recommended by the Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network.11 A “ready reckoner” was produced to allow practitioners to estimate a
patient’s daily energy requirement and then to
calculate a daily 500 kcal (2.5 MJ) deficit. Diet sheets
and supporting written resources facilitated the dietary
prescription to patients. At the end of the three

Invited to join study (n=unknown)

Returned consent form (n=991)
Lost during run-in
period (n=148, 15%)
Completed baseline assessment and randomised (n=843)

Patients in intervention
practices (n=415)

Patients in control
practices (n=428)

Withdrew (n=84, 20%)
3 month assessment
(n=331, 80%)

Withdrew (n=97, 23%)

3 month assessment
(n=333, 77%)

Withdrew (n=52, 12%)
12 month assessment
(n=279, 67%)

Withdrew (n=47, 11%)

12 month assessment
(n=286, 67%)

Withdrew (n=23, 6%)
18 month assessment
(n=256, 62%)

Withdrew (n=11, 3%)

18 month assessment
(n=275, 64%)

Fig 2 Flow of patients through the trial

BMJ VOLUME 327

8 NOVEMBER 2003

bmj.com

Primary care
training sessions, practices devised individualised
weight management protocols based on the model
and were encouraged to implement this with patients
recruited to the study. Control practices were asked to
provide usual care to their patients.
Outcome measures
The primary outcome measure was difference in mean
weight of patients between intervention and control
practices 12 months after the intervention. We also
measured difference in weight at three months and 18
months post-intervention. We measured knowledge of
obesity management and self reported behaviour in
obesity management consultations for all practice staff
before and after the intervention. We gathered this
information by using a questionnaire designed by us
and field tested with staff from non-participating
practices.
Process assessment
Practices had no trial specific responsibility to see
patients once the training intervention had been delivered. We used process assessment to provide insight
into the implementation of the weight management
protocol. Researchers extracted information from the
medical records of those patients still participating in
the trial, in both arms, one year after the intervention.
These data included whether patients had been seen
about their weight and whether weight, diet, and exercise targets had been recorded as advocated in the
intervention.
Sample size and analysis
A clinically significant effect of intervention can be
achieved with as little as 5% (or 3-5 kg) weight loss in
obese people.1 2 We designed the study to have 80%
power to detect a mean difference in weight between
treatment arms of approximately 3-5 kg, assuming 5%
significance and a within practice correlation coefficient of 0.05. Allowing for withdrawal and loss to
follow up of 15%, this gave a required number of
patients per treatment arm of approximately 660,
equivalent to 22 practices recruiting 30 patients each.
We collated all data on a purposefully designed
database by using Microsoft Access software. We
analysed change in both continuous and categorical
outcome variables by using STATA to account for both
within cluster and between cluster variation. We did
analyses on an intention to treat basis, where possible.
Blinding
Patients were not aware of the intervention status of
their practice, and researchers collecting outcome
measurements from patients were blind to the
intervention status of the practices, both before and
after the intervention. Double blinding was not
possible in this trial, as practice staff were inevitably
aware of whether or not they had been trained.

Results
All 44 practices completed the trial. One practice (allocated to the intervention group) declined the training
intervention but agreed to continue with outcome
assessment, and one would only consent to the training
if two of the three sessions were combined. Training
was delivered between June and November 2000. This
BMJ VOLUME 327

8 NOVEMBER 2003

bmj.com

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of patients and practices
Intervention

Control

Patients

(n=415)

(n=428)

Mean (SD) weight (kg)

100.8 (18.1)

100.2 (17.4)

Mean (SD) body mass index (kg/m2)

37.0 (5.7)

36.9 (5.8)

Mean (SD) age (years)

48.4 (10.9)

48.8 (12.2)

No (%) male

104 (25)

116 (27)

Practices

(n=22)

No (%) with dietetic input

9 (41%)

9 (41%)

3.4 (−0.9-5.8)

2.4 (0.1-7.1)

4 (3-6)

4 (2-6)

Median (interquartile range) socioeconomic status
Median (interquartile range) No of general practitioners

(n=22)

Table 2 Difference in weight and body mass index between patients from intervention
and control practices

Intervention

Control

Difference
(intervention−control)
(95% CI)

P value

Weight (kg)
Three months after training (n=664)

100.4

99.8

+0.6 (−2.1 to 3.2)

0.7

12 months after training (n=565)

100.3

99.3

+1.0 (−1.9 to 3.9)

0.5

18 months after training (n=531)

100.8

99.5

+1.3 (−1.8 to 4.4)

0.4

Body mass index (kg/m2)
Three months after training (n=663*)

36.8

36.9

−0.2 (−1.2 to 0.8)

0.7

12 months after training (n=564*)

36.9

36.8

0 (−1.0 to 1.0)

0.96

18 months after training (n=530*)

37.1

36.9

0.1 (−1.0 to 1.1)

0.9

*Height missing from data for one patient.

Table 3 Change in practitioners’ knowledge of obesity management
Odds ratio (95% CI) of
providing correct response
(intervention v control)

P value

By 1997, the prevalence of obesity in England was? (17%
men, 20% women)

2.0 (1.1 to 3.5)

0.02

What rate of weight loss would you recommend for obese
adults? (0.5-1 kg a week)

1.5 (0.5 to 3.9)

0.4

The recommended energy deficit for long term weight loss is?
(500 kcal)

3.0 (1.6 to 5.8)

0.001

Which of the following meals has the highest fat content?
(Minced meat pie, chips, and peas)

0.56 (0.3 to 1.02)

0.06

Adults trying to lose weight should be advised to eat less
starchy food? (False)

1.3 (0.5 to 2.9)

0.6

Question (correct response)

extended intervention period was due to difficulties in
arranging training sessions in practices.
In total, 991 patients gave consent, of whom 843
(85%) attended for collection of baseline data and were
subsequently randomised. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the practices and patients after randomisation.
Table 2 shows the difference in patients’ weight after
the training. Twelve months after the training the
patients in the intervention group were 1 (95%
confidence interval − 1.9 to 3.9) kg heavier than the
controls (P = 0.5).
Two hundred and thirty one (95%) practitioners
completed the questionnaire at baseline, and 192
(83%) of these completed the post-intervention assessment. Table 3 shows the difference in knowledge levels
between control and intervention practitioners after
the training. The odds ratio of providing the correct
response was higher for trained practices for all but
one of the five questions, but only two of these reached
statistical significance.
We collected process information from the medical
records of 670 patients. Table 4 shows the difference in
activities between intervention and control practices
one year after the training intervention. Patients in
trained practices consulted, on average, on two more
page 3 of 5

Primary care
occasions than patients in control practices in the year
after the delivery of the training. Trained practices were
more likely to discuss weight (odds ratio 2.0, P = 0.003),
and the records of patients from trained practices were
more likely to include weight (odds ratio 2.0,
P = 0.004), target weight (13.6, P ≤ 0.001), and dietary
targets (4.5, P = 0.02).

Discussion
The rapid increase in the incidence of obesity and
associated comorbidities presents a major challenge to
health care in the United Kingdom. The National
Audit Office reported a lack of “buy in” towards management of obesity on the part of general practitioners,
but also that training, information on the effectiveness
of interventions, and resources to use with patients
would assist them in the task.5 Our findings indicate
that a training package promoting a brief and
prescriptive approach to the treatment of obesity by
using lifestyle modification, and intended to assist primary care staff incorporating such treatment into routine care, did not ultimately affect the weight of this
motivated and at risk cohort of patients.
Impact of the intervention
The training was well received and was based on an
acceptable model applied in a previous study.8
Practitioners’ knowledge of the principles of obesity
management improved, and trained practitioners were
more likely to implement weight management
strategies promoted in the training. Patients from
trained practices were seen more often and were more
likely to have weight, target weights, and dietary targets
documented in their records, but in absolute terms the
level of implementation was low. Target weights were
recorded for only 14% of participating patients in
trained practices, compared with just 3% of participating patients in control practices, in the year after delivery of the training. Patients in trained practices
attended two more consultations than did those in
control practices, averaging eight consultations in the
year after the intervention. Treatment as per protocol
would entail fortnightly follow up until 10% of initial
body weight was lost, potentially some 20 or more consultations in the year. The low level of implementation
of the obesity management model means that we
cannot draw conclusions about its effectiveness.
The training programme was realistic in terms of
the type of training that might be delivered to primary
care teams by NHS dietitians. Obesity management is
complex, and strategies that have shown promise in
the literature include the application of behaviour
change techniques, antiobesity drugs, and promotion

of higher levels of physical activity. Undoubtedly, a four
and a half hour training programme can only scratch
the surface of these issues. Even so, several general
practitioners from these motivated practices expressed
misgivings about the need to devote so much time to
the subject, and indeed more in-depth training for
practice teams is unlikely to be feasible, set against
competing educational priorities in general practice.
Strengths and weaknesses of the study
Several previously recognised characteristics of obesity
treatment trials were evident in our study.12 Samples
are usually biased towards women, and our sample was
predominately female. In addition, our sample was
skewed towards more extreme obesity. Retention of
participants in obesity trials is recognised as problematic,12 and it was potentially an even greater problem in
our study, as the intervention was aimed at practices
and it may have been difficult for patients to see any
benefit from participation. Despite the observed loss to
follow up of patients, the study maintained 80% power
owing to a negligible within practice correlation
coefficient for the main outcome variable.
Using the general practice as the unit of
randomisation reduces the possibility of contamination between treatment arms by minimising the risk of
contact between health professionals from different
arms. As stated earlier, in an effort to further eliminate
contamination, we offered training only to general
practitioners and practice nurses. In reality, enforcing
this research condition was difficult, and many
additional practice staff, including district nurses and
health visitors, turned up for the training. We detected
no evidence of contamination between intervention
groups, but this cannot be ruled out.
Conclusion
This training programme resulted in only limited
implementation of an approach to obesity management and did not achieve improved patient weight loss.
A more in-depth training programme might be more
successful at changing practitioners’ behaviour but is
unlikely to be generalisable to most general practices
in the United Kingdom. Other strategies to manage
obesity in primary care urgently need to be considered
and evaluated. These might include motivated and
dedicated obesity specialists placed at the level of the
primary care trust, use of leisure services, and use of
the commercial weight loss sector.
We thank the dietetic managers, Chris Wyn-Jones (North
Durham), Julia Smith (Newcastle Nutrition), Sue Waddington
(Scarborough), and Celia Firmin (Leeds Community Dietetics)
for their contribution to the study design and help to ensure its
smooth running; Andy Vail (Hope Hospital, Salford) for his ini-

Table 4 Difference in process outcomes between patients from intervention and control practices after training. Values are numbers
(percentages) responding “Yes” unless stated otherwise
Question

Intervention

Control

Odds ratio (95% CI)

P value

317 (94)

318 (96)

0.6 (0.3 to 1.3)

0.23

8

6

1.3 (1.0 to 1.6)*

0.05

Is there evidence that weight has been discussed? (n=650)

186 (57)

129 (40)

2.0 (1.3 to 3.2)

0.003

Has weight been recorded? (n=650)

197 (61)

137 (42)

2.0 (1.3 to 3.3)

0.004

Has a target weight been recorded? (n=643)

46 (14)

9 (3)

13.6 (4.2 to 44.3)

<0.001

Have dietary targets been recorded? (n=648)

48 (15)

14 (4)

4.5 (1.2 to 16.7)

0.02

Have exercise targets been recorded? (n=648)

46 (14)

25 (8)

1.9 (0.7 to 5.0)

0.2

Has patient been seen since end of intervention? (n=668)
Median No of times (n=626)

*Estimate and confidence interval for attendance rate ratio.

page 4 of 5

BMJ VOLUME 327

8 NOVEMBER 2003

bmj.com

Primary care
What is already known on this topic
Most obesity management in the United Kingdom
takes place in primary care, but the approach is
not coordinated or consistent
Evidence shows that lifestyle modification can be
effective in the treatment of obesity
The Department of Health expects primary care
to deliver weight management to obese patients

What this study adds
A brief training programme delivered to primary
care improved practitioners’ knowledge and
behaviour but did not result in improved weight
loss in obese patients
Implementation of the brief, prescriptive weight
management model promoted in the training was
low
This raises questions about the feasibility of
primary care practitioners incorporating weight
management into routine clinical care

tial statistical advice; Gillian Raab and Isabella Butcher (Napier
University) for doing the randomisation; Paul Adamson for
database design; the staff and patients from the participating
practices; Ian Russell (University of Bangor) and Emma Harvey
(University of Leeds) for sharing methodological insights from
the UK BEAM trial; John Oldroyd and Jenny Copeland for their
contributions to the early stage of the project; and Pauline
Nelson, Brenda Fountain, Helen Medleycott, and Angela Udell
for data collection.
Contributors: HM was responsible for the conception, design,
analysis, interpretation, and project management of the study
and produced the first draft of this manuscript. CDS contributed
to the design and was involved in project management,
interpretation of results, and the second draft of the manuscript.
DCG contributed to the design, supervised and helped to
conduct the analysis, and contributed to the manuscript. PT

BMJ VOLUME 327

8 NOVEMBER 2003

bmj.com

contributed to the design of the study, was part of the advisory
committee, and contributed to the manuscript. JG, MH, KH, and
SW contributed to the project design, helped to develop and
deliver the intervention, carried out data collection, and contributed to interpretation of results and to the manuscript. AJA was
the principal investigator, supervised HM, shared responsibility
for conception, design, interpretation, and project management,
and contributed to the manuscript. HM and AJA are the
guarantors.
Funding: NHS Executive, Northern and Yorkshire.
Competing interests: None declared.
Ethical approval: The Northern and Yorkshire regional medical
research ethics committee and five local research ethics
committees approved the study.
1

Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. The prevention and treatment of
obesity. Eff Health Care 1997;3(2).
2 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults. Bethesda,
MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 1998. Available at
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/ob_home.htm
3 Department of Health. National service framework for coronary heart disease:
modern standards and service models. London: Department of Health, 2000.
4 Department of Health. Health improvement and prevention. National service
frameworks: a practical aid to implementation in primary care. Department of
Health, 2002. Available
at
www.doh.gov.uk/pricare/pdfs/nsf_
healthimprovement.pdf
5 National Audit Office. Tackling obesity in England: report by the Comptroller
and Auditor General. London: Stationery Office, 2001. Available at
www.nao.gov.uk/publications/nao_reports/00-01/0001220es.pdf
6 Harvey EL, Glenny AM, Kirk SF, Summerbell CD. A systematic review of
interventions to improve health professionals’ management of obesity. Int
J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1999;23:1213-22.
7 Moore H, Summerbell CD, Vail A, Greenwood DC, Adamson AJ. The
design features and practicalities of conducting a pragmatic cluster
randomised trial of obesity management in primary care. Stat Med
2001;20:331-40.
8 Moore H, Greenwood D, Gill T, Waine C, Soutter J, Adamson AJ. A cluster randomised trial to evaluate a nutrition training programme. Br J Gen
Pract 2003;53:271-7.
9 Raab G, Butcher I. Balance in cluster randomized trials. Stat Med
2001;20:351-65.
10 Andersson I, Rossner S. The Christmas factor in obesity therapy. Int J Obes
Relat Metab Disord 1992;16:1013-5.
11 Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Obesity in Scotland: integrating
prevention with weight management. Edinburgh: SIGN, 1996. (SIGN guideline no 8.)
12 Yanovski SZ, Bain RP, Williamson DF. Report of a National Institutes of
Health-Centers for Disease Control and Prevention workshop on the
feasibility of conducting a randomized clinical trial to estimate the longterm health effects of intentional weight loss in obese persons. Am J Clin
Nutr 1999;69:366-72.

(Accepted )

page 5 of 5

