Health Promotion International, Vol. 27 No. 2
doi:10.1093/heapro/dar016
Advance Access published 11 March, 2011

# The Author (2011). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

Applying the RE-AIM framework to evaluate two
implementation strategies used to introduce a tool for
lifestyle intervention in Swedish primary health care
1

Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Division of Community Medicine, Linköping University,
SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden 2R&D Department of Local Health Care, County Council
of Östergötland, S:t Larsgatan 9D, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden 3Linköping University, SE-581 83
Linköping, Sweden
*Corresponding author. E-mail: siw.carlfjord@liu.se

SUMMARY
The aim of this study was to evaluate two implementation
strategies for the introduction of a lifestyle intervention
tool in primary health care (PHC), applying the RE-AIM
framework to assess outcome. A computer-based tool for
lifestyle intervention was introduced in PHC. A theorybased, explicit, implementation strategy was used at three
centers, and an implicit strategy with a minimum of
implementation efforts at three others. After 9 months a
questionnaire was sent to staff members (n ¼ 159) and
data from a test database and county council registers were
collected. The RE-AIM framework was applied to evaluate

outcome in terms of reach, effectiveness, adoption and
implementation. The response rate for the questionnaire
was 73%. Significant differences in outcome were found
between the strategies regarding reach, effectiveness and
adoption, in favor of the explicit implementation strategy.
Regarding the dimension implementation, no differences
were found according to the implementation strategy. A
theory-based implementation strategy including a testing
period before using a new tool in daily practice seemed to
be more successful than a strategy in which the tool was
introduced and immediately used for patients.

Key words: implementation; primary health care; RE-AIM

INTRODUCTION
There is increasing interest in how to obtain the
best available quality in health care delivery.
Research regarding transference of knowledge
into practice has expanded considerably in
recent years. Different traditions can be identified, generally on the basis of EM Rogers’ theories about innovation diffusion (Rogers, 2003).
Estabrooks et al. identified four main domains
of ‘the knowledge utilization’ field in a bibliometric analysis: diffusion of innovations; knowledge utilization; technology transfer and

evidence-based medicine (EBM) (Estabrooks
et al., 2008). EBM emerged in the early 1990s
and has had a great influence on research on
implementation (Evidence-Based Medicine
Working Group, 1992). Implementation science,
which has developed in the wake of EBM, has
been defined by Eccles and Mittman (Eccles
and Mittman, 2006) as ‘the scientific study of
methods to promote the systematic uptake of
research findings and other evidence-based
practices into routine practice, and, hence, to
improve the quality and effectiveness of health
services and care’.
167

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

SIW CARLFJORD 1*, AGNETA ANDERSSON 2,3, PREBEN BENDTSEN 1,
PER NILSEN 1 and MALOU LINDBERG 2,3

168

S. Carlfjord et al.

METHODS
The RE-AIM framework
The RE-AIM framework can be used for the
evaluation of public health interventions but
also to fill the research-practice gap evaluating
the translatability of the interventions (www
.re-aim.org, 2010). Outcome is evaluated in five
dimensions:
reach,
efficacy,
adoption,
implementation and maintenance, and can be
adapted for use in a specific study (Farris et al.,
2007). Applied in the translation field, the term
effectiveness is often used instead of efficacy.
A detailed description of the RE-AIM dimensions and their application in this study is presented in Table 1. Reach measured the proportion
of staff members who chose to use the innovation
as a new working tool. Effectiveness measured the
effect on staff members’ attitudes and performance, which was assessed at the individual and
setting levels. The dimension adoption was not relevant according to its original definition, because
the PHC centers that were offered the new tool
were selected beforehand. Instead the dimension
adoption was used to assess adoption at the setting
level, by measuring the proportion of patients who
performed the test. Implementation measured
fidelity to the original ideas of the innovation. The
dimension maintenance was not considered in the
study. The concept of implementation in this
article is used in two ways: primarily to describe
the whole process of introducing and putting the
innovation into practice but also as one of the
dimensions of the RE-AIM framework.
The innovation
The innovation that was implemented was a
computer-based tool for screening and brief
intervention regarding alcohol use and physical
activity, developed for use in PHC. The tool
consists of a touch-screen computer and a
printer, placed in a so-called IT kiosk and staff
are encouraged to refer their patients to the
computer. Patients who perform the test receive
a printed test result and tailored advice
(Carlfjord et al., 2009).
Implementation strategies
Two implementation strategies were used to
introduce the computer-based tool for lifestyle
intervention in PHC: explicit and implicit

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

A current debate in implementation science
is the use of theories to form strategies for
implementation of change in clinical practice
(Eccles et al., 2005). Eccles et al. argue that
clinical practice is a form of human behavior,
and thus could be described in terms of
general human behavioral theories (Eccles
et al., 2005). The use of theory, on the other
hand, is rejected by Oxman et al., who say that
there is no need for theory in implementation
research
(Oxman
et
al.,
2005),
and
Bhattacharyya et al., who argue that there is no
scientific evidence proving that a theory-based
implementation strategy is more effective than
one that is built on common sense
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2006). There is, however,
evidence that behavior change interventions
based on theory are more effective than those
not based on theory (van Achterberg et al.,
2010).
Thus, there is a need for research exploring
whether theory-based strategies can contribute
to more effective implementation than less
theory-bound approaches (Bhattacharyya et al.,
2006). It is also important to evaluate whether
outcome is a result of the implementation
process or the intervention implemented (Farris
et al., 2007). One model that has been shown to
be helpful in the evaluation process is the
RE-AIM framework (Glasgow et al., 1999).
This model was developed to evaluate interventions, but has also been applied to plan and
conduct research studies, and to evaluate
implementation outcome (Glasgow et al., 1999;
Farris et al., 2007; Jillcott et al., 2007; Li et al.,
2008; Bakken and Ruland, 2009). The RE-AIM
framework offers a structure focusing on
five dimensions in the evaluation process:
reach, efficacy, adoption, implementation and
maintenance.
Implementation studies performed previously
in Swedish primary health care (PHC) settings
did not evaluate implementation strategy, but
have focussed on other factors affecting
implementation, such as adopter characteristics
and context (Lövgren et al., 2001; Toth-Pal
et al., 2008). The aim of the present study
was to evaluate two implementation strategies
for the introduction of a new tool for
lifestyle intervention in PHC, applying the
RE-AIM framework to assess outcome in
terms of reach, effectiveness, adoption and
implementation.

Evaluation of implementation strategies

169

a

Table 1: The RE-AIM framework and its application in the present study
Original RE-AIM
definition

Application on
implementation of
innovations in PHC

Definition in this study

Outcome variable

Reach

The absolute number,
proportion and
representativeness of
individuals who are
willing to participate
in a given initiative
The effect of an
intervention on
important outcomes,
including potential
negative effects,
quality of life and
economic outcomes

Proportion and
representativeness of
staff members who
report having referred
patients to the
computer at least
once a month
The effect of the
introduction of the
computer-based test
on staff members’
attitudes and
performance
regarding lifestyle
issues at the PHC
center

Proportion of staff
members referring
patients at least once
a month

Effectiveness

Absolute number,
proportion and
representativeness of
staff members who
have participated, i.e.
used the innovation
in their practice
The effect of the
introduction of the
innovation on staff
members’ attitudes
and performance

Adoption

The absolute number,
proportion and
representativeness of
settings and
intervention agents
who are willing to
initiate a program

The extent to which the
innovation has been
accepted at center
level

Implementation

At the setting level,
implementation refers
to the intervention
agents’ fidelity to the
various elements of
an intervention’s
protocol

Fidelity to the original
ideas linked to the
innovation. Is it used
as intended?

The extent to which the
computer has been
used at center level,
measured by
proportion of visiting
patients who perform
the test or have been
referred to the
computer
Fidelity to the original
ideas linked to the
computer-based test.
Are patients being
referred, is the result
discussed with
patients, is the test
discussed among staff
members?

Maintenance

The extent to which a
program or policy
becomes
institutionalized or
part of the routine

The extent to which the
innovation has been
institutionalized and
is still in use after a
specified time period

a

Not relevant in this
study

Frequency of discussing
lifestyle with patients
now versus before.
Perceptions about
referring to the test.
Reliance on effects of
the test. Agreeing
with advice provided.
Perceptions of
lifestyle issue
importance at the
center. Acceptance in
staff group
Proportion of patients
performing the test
and being referred to
the test

Test discussed in staff
group. Test results
discussed with
patients. Proportion
of patients referred
and reasons for not
referring. Feelings of
being a part in the
implementation
process
Not relevant in this
study

RE-AIM, reach, effectiveness: adoption, implementation and maintenance.

implementation
strategies.
The
explicit
implementation strategy was based on Rogers’
theories about the innovation-decision process,
including knowledge, persuasion, decision and
implementation (Rogers, 2003). Attributes of
the innovation, such as trialability and observability, were also taken into account (Rogers,
2003). The strategy began with an information
session with a change agent from the research

team visiting the center (knowledge). This was
followed by a testing period for 1 month, during
which all staff members were encouraged to
perform the test themselves, and give their
opinions about it ( persuasion, trialability,
observability). After the testing period, the
change agent visited the center again; there was
a discussion about how the test could be used in
daily work, and a mutual agreement to

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

Dimension

170

S. Carlfjord et al.

Setting and study participants
Swedish health care is publicly funded with hospital care and PHC provided by the county
councils. Each county council has the responsibility to provide health care and preventive services to the population. Six PHC centers, with
general practitioners (GPs), nurses and other
staff members, two in each of three different
county councils in the south east of Sweden,
were recruited to the study. All the centers volunteered to participate. Through randomization,
one center within each county council was
selected to each one of the two implementation
strategies. Before the introduction of the
computer-based tool there was no difference
between explicit centers and implicit centers
regarding the perception of how lifestyle issues
were prioritized at the center.
Data collection
When computers had been in operation for
9 months, a questionnaire was sent by e-mail to
staff members at the participating centers. The
questionnaire was developed for the present
study and the questions were thoroughly examined and discussed by a group of experts in the
research team until consensus was reached. The
questionnaire was tested by staff at a PHC
center with experience of the computer-based
lifestyle test, not participating in the study, and
their comments were taken into account for the
final version (Streiner and Norman, 2007).

Apart from background factors, such as gender
and profession, the questionnaire included
seven statements about the computer-based tool
answered on a 4-degree Likert scale with the
response alternatives agree, partly agree, partly
disagree, disagree and some questions concerning referral to the computer and opinions about
lifestyle issues. Questions were formulated with
the aim of covering and evaluating the three
RE-AIM dimensions: reach, effectiveness and
implementation. The questionnaires were distributed to all clinical staff members at the participating centers who meet patients in their
daily practice, and thus could be expected to
refer patients to the lifestyle test. Using the
Web-based tool Publechw Survey 5.6, 159 questionnaires were distributed, 77 to explicit
centers, 82 to implicit centers. Questionnaires
were answered anonymously.
Number of performed tests at each center
and number of patients stating they had been
referred to the computer were obtained from
the computer database. The number of patients
aged 18 years and older who had visited the
center was obtained from county council registers. These data were used to evaluate the
RE-AIM dimension adoption and were also
collected after 9 months of operation.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed with the aim of comparing
explicit centers with implicit centers. Data concerning adoption were analyzed as the proportion of visiting patients who performed the
test and proportion of visiting patients who performed the test after referral; these are presented in terms of risk ratio. Analysis of
differences between groups according to ordinal
data was performed using the Mann –Whitney
test, and differences according to categorical
non-parametric data were analyzed using the x2
test. Statistical significance was set at p  0.05.
Statistical analyses were performed using the
computer-based analysis program Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version
16.0, and the open access statistical program
OpenEpi version 2.3.
RESULTS
The number of responding individuals was 52
from the explicit centers and 64 from the

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

incorporate it or not, as a working method, was
made (decision). After that second meeting
the lifestyle test was made available to patients
and referral to the test was encouraged
(implementation).
The
implicit
implementation
strategy
included an information session at the center by
a change agent from the research team. The
computer-based lifestyle test was introduced,
and staff members got instructions about the
opportunity to refer their patients to the test.
No further dialogue was encouraged. The computer with the lifestyle test was installed and
patient testing could start immediately.
In the rest of this article, the centers where
explicit implementation strategy was used are
called explicit centers, and centers where
implicit implementation strategy was used are
called implicit centers.

Evaluation of implementation strategies

Reach
The dimension reach was measured using one
question about frequency of referral to the test.
The response alternatives were daily, once a
week, once a month or never. At the explicit
centers, 17% answered never, compared with
47% at implicit centers. Thus, the proportion of
staff members referring to the test at least once
a month was 83% at explicit centers and 53% at
implicit centers. The difference was significant
( p ¼ 0.001). Weekly or daily referral was
reported by 29% of staff at explicit centers, and
16% of staff at implicit centers ( p ¼ 0.085). The
main reason for not referring patients to the
test was forgetting. The representativeness
among those referring was also evaluated. At
explicit centers, 83% reported referring patients
to the test (GPs 83%, nurses 77%, other staff
members 93%). At implicit centers 53% of staff
reported referring to the test (GPs 50%, nurses
48%, other staff members 63%).
Effectiveness
Seven statements/questions concerned the
dimension effectiveness (Table 2). Significant
differences between the two strategies were
found in four of the seven items assessed, all in
favor of the explicit implementation strategy. A
fifth item reached the p-value 0.063. All these

Table 2: Responses to questions concerning
effectiveness: comparison between the two
strategies
Statement/Question

Implementation
strategy

p-Value

Explicit Implicit
Using the computer-based lifestyle test is well supported
among staff
Agree
9
7
0.203a
Partly agree
26
27
Partly disagree
12
20
Disagree
5
7
Total (n)
52 (52) 61 (64)
It is my opinion that this health care center prioritizes
discussion lifestyle issues with patients
Agree
20
15
0.226a
Partly agree
21
29
Partly disagree
10
15
Disagree
1
0
Total (n)
52 (52) 59 (64)
It feels good/would feel good to refer patients to the
computer-based lifestyle test
Agree
16
10
0.063a
Partly agree
30
40
Partly disagree
5
7
Disagree
1
4
Total (n)
52 (52) 61 (64)
It is my judgment that it is possible to influence patients’
lifestyles with the aid of the computer-based lifestyle
test
Agree
10
4
0.045a
Partly agree
30
36
Partly disagree
11
18
Disagree
1
3
Total (n)
52 (52) 61 (64)
Have you read the advice provided by the computer-based
lifestyle test?
Yes, I did read the advice
48
44
0.013b
No, I did not read the
4
15
advice
Total (n)
52 (52) 59 (64)
I feel I can stand for the advice provided by the
c
computer-based lifestyle test
Agree
16
4
0.011a
Partly agree
30
38
Partly disagree
2
2
Disagree
0
0
Total (n)
48 (48) 44 (44)
How often have you brought up lifestyle questions with
patients since the computer-based lifestyle test was
introduced, compared with before its introduction?
Much more often now
8
1
0.012a
Somewhat more often now
10
6
Just as often
31
52
Somewhat more often
3
2
previously
Much more often previously
0
0
Total (n)
52 (52) 61 (64)
a

Mann– Whitney test.
x test.
Only respondents who did read the advice.

b 2
c

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

implicit centers, yielding response rates of 68
and 78%, respectively. Women had higher
response rates than men (75 versus 63%). The
response rate for nurses was 78%, GPs 54%
and other staff groups 83%. Response rates
according to gender or profession did not differ
significantly between the two strategies.
Most of the respondents (84%) were women,
81% at the explicit centers and 86% at the
implicit centers. Age ranged from 26 to
70 years; the mean age was 49 years at the explicit centers and 50 years at the implicit centers.
At explicit centers, 81% of the respondents had
been working in their profession for at least
10 years; at implicit centers 77% had at least
10 years experience. According to profession,
19% of responders were GPs (23% at explicit
centers, 16% at implicit centers), 51% were
nurses (50% at explicit centers, 52% at implicit
centers) and 30% represented other staff groups
(27% at explicit centers, 33% at implicit
centers).

171

172

S. Carlfjord et al.

five items were assessed on the individual level;
the two items on the setting level were the two
that showed no difference between strategies.
Adoption
Data concerning the dimension adoption are
presented in Table 3, and show a significantly
higher proportion of patients performing the
test and being referred to the test at explicit
centers than at implicit centers.

DISCUSSION
The main finding from this study was that three
of the four assessed RE-AIM dimensions used
to evaluate outcome seemed to be associated
with the implementation strategy used. The
RE-AIM dimensions that were affected by the
implementation strategy used were reach, effectiveness and adoption. The dimension
implementation did not show any differences
according to implementation strategy. The
adapted RE-AIM framework was found to be
applicable for evaluating the implementation of
a new tool for lifestyle intervention in PHC. A
strength in the study was the high response
rates regarding the questionnaire, and the representativeness of the responders, even though
the number of participating units selected for
the study was limited.
Regarding the dimension reach, a higher proportion of staff members at the explicit centers
reported using the new working tool. It is likely
that the 1-month testing period facilitated reach
in terms of acceptance at the individual level.
When the computer-based tool was introduced
at the different PHC centers, there was a
decision to accept it on organizational level.
However, to be used in the setting, each staff
member had to make their own decision to
accept the innovation. A possible explanation
for our findings can be found in Frambach and
Schillewaert’s model demonstrating how

Implementation strategy
Explicit Implicit
Visiting patients age
18 years
Tests, total number
Tests, referred patients
Tests (RR)
Referred (RR)

14 235
660
365
1
1

13 872
346
143
0.54 (CI ¼ 0.48– 0.60)
0.40 (CI ¼ 0.34– 0.48)

different factors influence the individual’s attitude to an innovation that is already accepted
by
the
organization
(Frambach
and
Schillewaert, 2002). Organizational factors (e.g.
management support and training), personal
characteristics (e.g. values, experience and innovativeness) and social influence from peers or
networks form the individual’s attitude to the
innovation, and lead to an individual decision
to accept (adopt) or reject (Frambach and
Schillewaert, 2002).
Items regarding effectiveness assessed on the
setting level, like the overall attitudes among
staff and discussions about lifestyle issues or
about the test, did not differ between the two
strategies. Effectiveness on the individual level,
however, seemed to be influenced by the strategy used. A high proportion of staff members at
the explicit centers, who had been encouraged
to perform the test themselves, had read the
advice provided by the computer and stated
that they agreed with the advice. They also
brought up lifestyle issues more often than they
did before. This can probably be explained in
terms of learning, because the change involved
in introducing and starting to use a new tool
might have been facilitated by testing the computer, and reading and reflecting on the advice
provided by the computer.
Research use in terms of learning on the individual and organizational levels has been
studied by The Research Unit for Research
Utilization (RURU) group (Nutley et al., 2007).
Individual learning has been shown to be most
effective when learners can interact with one
another and where processing experiences
through
reflection
is
encouraged.
Organizational learning is facilitated by cultural

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

Implementation
Eight of the questions/statements assessed the
dimension implementation. Responses to these
questions are presented in Table 4. Regarding
implementation there were no significant differences between the two implementation
strategies.

Table 3: Number of tests and number of referred
patients versus number of patients aged 18 years
and older visiting the center: comparison between
the two strategies in terms of risk ratio

Evaluation of implementation strategies

173

Table 4: Responses to the questions concerning implementation: comparison between the two strategies
Statement/Question

Implementation strategy
Explicit

p-Value

Implicit

a

Mann–Whitney test.
x test.
Only respondents who state they do refer to the test.
d
Only respondents who state they have discussed the results.
e
Only respondents who state they do not discuss the results.
f
Only respondents who state they never refer to the test.
g
No statistical test could be performed because of the low number of respondents.
b 2
c

values such as belief in human potential, openness, trust and tolerance of mistakes (Nutley
et al., 2007). It seems likely that the explicit
strategy used in the present study influenced

individual learning, but had limited effect on
learning at the organizational level. It should be
noted that, also at explicit centers, two-thirds of
the staff group reported a low rate of using the

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

Staff often discuss the computer-based test
Agree
3
3
0.408a
Partly agree
17
17
Partly disagree
24
28
Disagree
8
13
Total (n)
52 (52)
61 (64)
I have felt being involved in the process with introducing the computer-based lifestyle test at the center
Agree
10
8
0.452a
Partly agree
22
21
Partly disagree
6
21
Disagree
14
11
Total (n)
52 (52)
61 (64)
How do you use the results from the computer-based lifestyle test in meetings with your patients?c
I do not use the results
20
16
0.727b
I discuss the results if the patient bring it up
19
14
I ask for the results and try to start a discussion
4
3
Total (n)
43 (43)
33 (34)
d
When do you discuss the results from the computer-based lifestyle test with patients?
During the appointment when I refer the patient to the test
13
4
0.113b
At the next appointment
17
9
Other time
3
4
Total (n)
23 (23)
17 (17)
Of the patients you have referred to the computer-based lifestyle test, approximately what percentage have you discussed
the results with?d
10% or less
16
12
0.944b
More than 10%
7
5
Total (n)
23 (23)
17 (17)
Why have you not used the results of the computer-based lifestyle test at appointments with your patients?e
It has not been relevant
7
6
0.737b
I forget
2
1
No time
4
1
Other
7
6
Total (n)
20 (20)
14 (16)
Since beginning to use the computer-based lifestyle test, approximately what percentage of your patients have you referred
to the test?c
10% or less
31
27
0.323b
More than 10%
12
6
Total (n)
43 (43)
33 (34)
Why have you not referred patients to the computer-based lifestyle test?f
g
It is not my job
1
3
It does not fit into my routines
2
3
I forget
2
10
Lack of time
0
0
Other
0
1
Total (n)
5 (9)
17 (30)

174

S. Carlfjord et al.

The RE-AIM dimension maintenance was
not considered in this study, because change at
organizational level tends to be a slow process,
and the long-term evaluation will not be conducted until the tool has been in operation for
2 years.
One of the features of the explicit implementation strategy (the discussion/decision session)
was expected to produce a higher level of staff
involvement in the decision process. However,
staff at these centers did not express a higher
degree of perceived involvement. Involvement
is an important issue in change and innovation.
Poole and Van de Ven argue that ‘successful
planned change requires a commitment
grounded in an engaging vision and deep
emotional involvement with the program’
(Poole and Van de Ven, 2004). It seems that
offering a discussion/decision session is not sufficient to achieve this deep emotional involvement. In addition to the decision session, the
major difference between the two implementation strategies was the 1-month testing period,
which did not generate any additional costs.
Thus, implementation outcome improved
despite limited financial input, an important
factor because benefits and costs of the
implementation and the benefits and costs as a
result of changes in provider behavior have to
be considered at the introduction of new tools
or guidelines in health care (Grimshaw et al.,
2004).
Implementation strategy was the only factor
influencing implementation outcome that was
evaluated in the present study. Other important
factors have also been shown to affect the
implementation process. The Promoting Action
on Research Implementation in Health Services
(PARIHS) model describes implementation
success as a function of the nature and type of
evidence, the qualities of the context and the
way the process is facilitated (Kitson et al.,
2008). The implementation strategies used in
our study represented two ways of facilitating
the process. The evidence (in our case the lifestyle intervention tool) was the same in all
centers, although context might have differed
between the PHC centers. Greenhalgh et al.
also highlight the importance of the characteristics of the potential adopters, another factor
that was not considered in the present study
Greenhalgh et al. (2005).
Whether implementation strategies should
be based on theory or not has been discussed

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

new tool, referring patients to the computerbased test less than once a week.
The dimension effectiveness in the RE-AIM
framework suggests that not only positive effects
of an intervention but also unexpected negative
effects should be evaluated (Lövgren et al., 2001).
Such unexpected negative effects on participants
were found in a study of a physical activity intervention among students conducted by Zabinski
et al. (Zabinski et al., 2001) who found increasing
concerns about slimming in women. In our study,
one negative consequence of the availability of a
computer-based lifestyle test could be staff
neglecting to talk about lifestyle with their
patients, believing that providing the computerbased test is sufficient. This was assessed, but no
such consequences were found regarding either
of the two strategies. Other negative effects from
using the new tool were not studied, which could
be considered a limitation.
Adoption regarding the proportion of
patients performing the test and the proportion
being referred differed between the explicit and
implicit centers, which is somewhat surprising
because only referral was expected to be influenced by the explicit implementation strategy.
One possible explanation could be that individual staff members at the explicit centers discussed lifestyle issues with their patients to a
higher degree and, even if they did not refer
their patients to the test, patients themselves
became curious and performed the test spontaneously. Data concerning referral to the test
in this study were patient-reported, leaving
unanswered the question about how many
patients were referred to the test but did not do
it. This is a weakness, but it probably affects the
centers for the different strategies equally, and
should not influence the results regarding the
implementation strategy used.
The implementation dimension, concerning
the extent to which the innovation has been
used as intended, showed no differences according to the implementation strategy used. It
would appear that those using the test used it in
a similar way and this did not depend on how it
was introduced. A study of guideline implementation among nurses showed that the adaptation
of guidelines to local circumstances was crucial
for a successful implementation (Alanen et al.,
2009). This was not the case in our study, as
staff members chose to adopt or reject the tool,
but once they had decided to adopt it they used
it in the intended way.

Evaluation of implementation strategies

by several researchers (Eccles et al., 2005,
Oxman et al., 2005, Bhattacharyya et al., 2006).
The theory-based strategy used in our study
seemed to have a positive impact on the
implementation. If this was a result solely of
the strategy being based on theory, or if other
factors, beyond the scope of this study, influenced outcome remains unsolved. The aim
with this study, however, was to evaluate how
outcome was influenced by the implementation
strategy
used,
applying
the
RE-AIM
framework.

In this study, we compared an explicit theorybased implementation strategy with an implicit
strategy. Our conclusion is that, regarding the
dimensions reach, adoption and effectiveness,
the theory-based implementation strategy,
including a testing period and allowing staff to
try the innovation before using it in their daily
practice, seemed to be more successful than a
strategy in which the innovation was introduced
and immediately used for patients.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to managers and staff
at the PHC centers who participated in the
study.
Conflict of interest: P.B. holds shares in and
works as a consultant for a company that develops and markets computer-based lifestyle tests
similar to the one mentioned in this paper.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Medical
Research Council of Southeast Sweden
(FORSS) [71891]; and by the Swedish Council
for Working Life and Research (FAS)
[2009-0806].

REFERENCES
Alanen, S., Välimäki, M. and Kaila, M. (2009) Nurses’
experiences of guideline implementation: a focus
group study. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 18,
2613– 2621.

Bakken, S. and Ruland, C. (2009) Translating clinical
informatics interventions into routine clinical care: how
can the RE-AIM framework help? Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 16, 889– 897.
Bhattacharyya, O., Reeves, S., Garfinkel, S. and Zwarstein,
M. (2006) Designing theoretically-informed implementation interventions. Implementation Science, 1, 5.
Carlfjord, S., Nilsen, P., Leijon, M., Andersson, A.,
Johansson, K. and Bendtsen, P. (2009) Computerized
lifestyle intervention in routine primary health care.
Evaluation of usage on provider and responder levels.
Patient Education and Counseling, 75, 238–243.
Eccles, M. and Mittman, B. (2006) Welcome to implementation science. Implementation Science, 1, 1.
Eccles, M., Grimshaw, J., Walker, A., Johnston, M. and
Pitts, N. (2005) Changing the behavior of healthcare
professionals the use of theory in promoting the uptake
of research findings. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology,
58, 107 –112.
Estabrooks, C., Derksen, L., Winther, C., Lavis, J. N.,
Scott, S. D., Wallin, L. et al. (2008) The intellectual
structure and substance of the knowledge utilization
field: a longitudinal author co-citation analysis, 1945 to
2004. Implementation Science, 3, 49.
Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. (1992)
Evidence-based medicine. A new approach to teaching
the practice of medicine. JAMA, 268, 2420– 2425.
Farris, R. P., Will, J. C., Khavjou, O. and Finkelstein,
E. A. (2007) Beyond effectiveness: evaluating the public
health impact of the WISEWOMAN program.
American Journal of Public Health, 97, 641– 647.
Frambach, R. and Schillewaert, N. (2002) Organizational
innovation adoption—a multi-level framework of determinants and opportunities for future research. Journal
of Business Research, 55, 163 –176.
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M. and Boles, S. M. (1999)
Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion
interventions: the RE-AIM framework. American
Journal of Public Health, 89, 1322–1326.
Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., Bate, P., Macfarlane, F. and
Kyriakidou, O. (2005) Diffusion of Innovation in Health
Service Organisations. A Systematic Literature Review.
BMJ Books, Oxford.
Grimshaw, J. M., Thomas, R. E., MacLennan, G., Fraser,
C., Ramsay, C. R., Vale, L. et al. (2004) Effectiveness
and efficiency of guideline dissemination and implementation strategies. Health Technology Assessment, 8,
1 –351.
Jillcott, S., Ammerman, A., Sommers, J. and Glasgow,
R. E. (2007) Applying the RE-AIM framework to assess
the public health impact of policy change. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 34, 105–114.
Kitson, A. L., Rycroft-Malone, J., Harvey, G.,
McCormack, B., Seers, K. and Titchen, A. (2008)
Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence
into practice using the PARIHS framework: theoretical
and practical challenges. Implementation Science, 3, 1.
Li, F., Harmer, P., Glasgow, R., Mack, K. A., Sleet, D.,
Fisher, K. J. et al. (2008) Translation of an effective tai
chi intervention into a community-based falls-prevention
program. American Journal of Public Health, 98, 1195–
1198.
Lövgren, G., Åström, G. and Engström, B. (2001) A care
policy and its implementation. International Journal of
Nursing Practice, 7, 92–103.

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

CONCLUSION

175

176

S. Carlfjord et al.

Nutley, S. M., Walter, I. and Davies, H. T. O. (2007) Using
Evidence. How Research Can Inform Public Services.
Policy Press, Bristol.
Oxman, A. D., Fretheim, A. and Flottorp, S. (2005) The
OFF theory of research utilization. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 58, 113 –116.
Poole, M. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (2004) Handbook of
Organizational Change and Innovation. Oxford
University Press, New York, p. 27.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovation. Free Press,
New York.
Streiner, D. L. and Norman, G. R. (2007) Health
Measurement Scales. A Practical Guide to Their
Development and Use, 3rd edition. Oxford University
Press, New York.

Toth-Pal, E., Wårdh, I., Strender, L-E. and Nilsson, G.
(2008) Implementing a clinical decision-support system
in practice: a qualitative analysis of influencing attitudes
and characteristics among general practitioners.
Informatics for Health and Social Care, 33, 39–54.
van Achterberg, T., Huisman-de Waal, G. G., Ketelaar, N.
A., Oostendorp, R. A., Jacobs, J. E. and Wollersheim,
H. C. (2010) How to promote healthy behaviours in
patients? An overview of evidence for behaviour
change techniques. Health Promotion International, 26,
148–162.
Zabinski, M. F., Calfas, K. J., Gehrman, C. A., Wilfley, D. E.
and Sallis, J. F. (2001) Effects of physical activity intervention on body image in university seniors: project
GRAD. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 23, 247– 252.

Downloaded from http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/ at Consorcio Osakidetza on October 19, 2016

